Aaron Burr was a [[Democratic-Republicans|Democratic-Republican]] who was nominated as [[Vice-President]] under [[Thomas Jefferson]] in the 1800 election. A Democratic-Republican caucus in 1804 decided not to nominate Aaron Burr for a second term as vice president. Burr then embarked on a series of ventures, one of which threatened to break up the Union and another of which resulted in the death of political rival [[Alexander Hamilton]].
## Federalist Conspiracy
Secretly forming a political pact with some radical [[New England]] [[Federalists]], Burr planned to win the governorship of [[New York]] in 1804, unite that state with the New England states, and then lead this group of states to secede from the nation. Most Federalists followed Alexander Hamilton in opposing Burr, who was defeated in the New York election. The conspiracy then disintegrated.
## Duel with Hamilton
Angered by an insulting remark attributed to Hamilton, Burr challenged the federalist leader to a duel and fatally shot him. Hamilton's death in 1804 deprived the Federalists of their last great leader and earned Burr the enmity of many.
## Trial for Treason
By 1806, Burr's intrigues had turned westward with a plan to take [[Mexico]] from [[Spain]] and possibly unite it with [[Louisiana]] under his rule. Learning of the conspiracy, Jefferson ordered Burr's arrest and trial for treason. Presiding at the trial was [[Supreme Court]] chief justice [[John Marshall]], a long-time adversary of Jefferson. A jury acquitted Burr, basing its decision on Marshall's 