Ancient Egypt was one of the first river-valley civilizations. Egyptian history includes three long periods of stability and achievement interspersed with shorter periods of political disorder. Egyptian society was organized in layers, but most people worked the land.
## Geography and Religion
The [[Nile River]] played an important role in Egyptian civilization. Egyptians wrote of their reliance on the great river in "Hymn to the Nile," praising it as the "creator of all good" in its ability to bring them food and other riches. Like their religious beliefs, the Nile provided a sense of well-being and comfort to the Egyptians
### The Nile
The [[Nile River]] begins in the heart of [[Africa]] and courses northward for more than 4,000 miles. it is the longest river in  the world. Before it empties into the [[Mediterranean Sea]], the Nile splits int o two **major** branches. This split forms a triangular territory called a delta. The Nile Delta is called **Lower Egypt**; the land upstream, to the south, is called **Upper Egypt**. Egypt's important cities developed at the tip of the delta, the point at which the Nile divides.

The ancient Egyptians referred to the river's yearly flooding as the "miracle" of the mile. The river rose in the summer from heavy rains in central Africa, reached its highest point in Egypt in early autumn, and left a deposit of mud that created an area of rich soil several miles wide on both sides of the river. The Egyptians called this dark-colored, fertile land the "Black Land." Beyond it lay the deserts, the "Red Land".

Farmers in the Nile Valley grew a surplus of food, which made Egypt prosperous. The river also served as a unifying factor in Egyptian history. In ancient times, the Nile was the fastest way to travel through the land, making both transportation and communication easier. North winds pushed sailboats south, and the Nile’s current carried them north.

Unlike [[Mesopotamia]], which was subject to constant invasion, Egypt was blessed by natural barriers that gave it protection from invasion and a sense of security. These barriers included the deserts to the west and east; the Red Sea to the east; the cataracts, or rapids, on the southern part of the Nile, which made defense relatively easy; and the Mediterranean Sea to the north. 

The regularity of the Nile floods and the relative isolation of the Egyptians created a feeling of security and changelessness. To the ancient Egyptians, when the Nile flooded each year, “the fields laugh and people’s faces light up.” Unlike people in [[Mesopotamia]], Egyptians faced life with a spirit of confidence in the stability of things. Ancient Egyptian civilization was marked by a remarkable degree of continuity over thousands of years.
### The Growth of Religion
Religion, too, provided the Egyptians with a sense of security and timelessness. They had no word for religion. For them, religious ideas represented an inseparable part of the entire world order. The Egyptians were **polytheistic**. They had a number of gods associated with heavenly bodies and natural forces. Two groups, sun gods and land gods (including river gods), came to have special significance in view of the importance of the sun and the fertile land along the Nile to Egypt’s well-being. 

The sun, the source of life, was worthy of worship. The sun god took on different forms and names based on his role. The Egyptian ruler took the title “Son of [[Re]].” The rulers were seen as an earthly form of Re, one of the sun god’s names.

River and land gods included [[Osiris]] and [[Isis]]. A famous myth told of the struggle between Osiris, who brought civilization to Egypt, and his evil brother Seth. When Seth cut Osiris into pieces and tossed them into the Nile, Isis, Osiris’s wife, found the pieces. With help from other gods, she brought Osiris back to life. Osiris became a symbol of resurrection, or rebirth. By identifying with Osiris, Egyptians hoped to gain new life after death. The dead were placed in tombs (in the case of kings, in pyramid tombs) and through rituals would become Osiris. Like Osiris, they would then be reborn. The flooding of the Nile and the new life that it brought to Egypt were symbolized by Isis’s bringing all of Osiris’s parts together each spring in the festival of the new land.

