[[Isaac Newton|Newton]]'s third law states that if object $A$ exerts a [[force]] on object $B$, then object $B$ must exert a force of equal magnitude and opposite direction back on object $A$.

This law represents a certain symmetry in nature: forces always occur in pairs, and one body cannot exert a force on another without experiencing a force itself. We sometimes refer to this law loosely as action-reaction, where the force exerted is the action and the force experienced as a consequence is the reaction.

We can readily see Newton's third law at work by taking a look at how people move about. Consider a swimmer pushing off from the side of a pool. The swimmer pushes against the pool wall with her feet and accelerates in the direction opposite to that of her push. The wall has exerted an equal and opposite force back on the swimmer. You might think that two equal and opposite forces would cancel, but they do not because they act on different [[system]]s. In this case, there are two systems that we could investigate: the swimmer or the wall. If we select the swimmer to be the system of interest, as in the image below, then $F_\text{wall\;on\;feet}$ is an external force on this system and affects its motion. The swimmer moves in the direction of $F_\text{wall\;on\;feet}$. In contrast, the force $F_\text{feet\;on\;wall}$ acts on the wall and not on our system on interest. Thus $F_\text{feet\;on\;wall}$ does not directly affect the motion of the system and does not cancel $F_\text{wall\;on\;feet}$. Note that the swimmer pushes in the direction opposite to that in which she wishes to move. The reaction to her push is thus in the desired direction.